From the New York Times,
>> [music]
>> I'm Rachel Abrams and this is The Daily.
[music]
>> Since the war with Iran began, President
Trump [music] has insisted that rising
energy prices would be temporary.
But the strikes [music] last week on
important natural gas facilities in
Qatar and elsewhere in the Gulf have
made the prospect of a quick recovery
>> [music]
>> seem less and less likely.
Today,
my colleague Patricia Cohen explains why
the economic impacts may be felt for
[music] years.
>> [music]
>> It's Wednesday, March 25th.
Hi Patty Cohen. Hey Rachel. You are a
first-time guest, I think. Yes,
first-time guest, long-time listener.
>> That's what we like to hear.
So Patty, at the beginning of the war,
so much of the conversation about energy
prices focused on the Strait of Hormuz,
getting oil and gas out of the Persian
Gulf. And because the Strait of Hormuz
has been closed, oil prices spiked super
quickly because the uncertainty about
when the Strait would actually open
again. That is still a huge issue, but
it seems like in the last few days, the
energy situation has expanded beyond the
Strait. So tell us what's been going on.
So I would say that the attacks that we
saw last week on some of the energy
infrastructure
really moved the war into another phase.
>> Mhm. In terms of both energy supplies
and the global economy, instead of
talking about the impact in terms of
days and weeks, now we're talking about
it in terms of months and years.
>> Mhm. And why is that? Because what you
had is that the production capacity, the
ability to supply
one of the world's really important
energy supplies, which is liquefied
natural gas, those facilities were
bombed.
>> You're talking about different attacks,
right? You're talking about the Israel
attacks on the Iran energy
infrastructure and the Iranian attacks
on infrastructure in Qatar, right?
Right.
>> [music]
>> Israel hit a major Iranian gas complex
on Wednesday.
>> So the Israelis attacked Iran's
infrastructure. Prompting Iran to strike
another major facility in Qatar to And
then Iran retaliated.
>> The world's biggest liquefied natural
gas facility, Qatar's Ras Laffan, was
damaged by an Iranian missile strike.
And attacked the gas fields in Qatar.
The attacks, quote, fundamentally
reshape the global LNG outlook.
>> [music]
>> And that was a big deal. Because Qatar
is a big producer of liquefied natural
gas.
>> [music]
>> I mean, so before we were looking at
basically a transportation issue Right.
When the Strait was closed. Now we're
looking at something that's longer
lasting, which is the ability to produce
liquefied natural gas or LNG. Let's
refer to it as that. It's a little bit
easier.
>> yes. Yes, for sure. So what exactly was
struck in Qatar?
So what was destroyed were two LNG
trains. And they're not really trains.
What they are are plants that process
and convert natural gas into a liquid.
Trains feels a little misleading. This
is a facility.
>> Yeah, it's a facility. I know. It's a
It's a kind of a weird word, but it's
kind of a facility and it's a very
expensive facility and it takes a long
time to build.
>> Mhm. And what happens is that you take
gas and you freeze it to 240 or 260
degrees below zero.
>> Mhm. And then you compress it. And so it
takes up 600 times less space than gas
cuz you turn it into a liquid. And so
that's complicated and then you have to
transport it in the same specialized
container so that you can bring it
somewhere else.
>> not as simple as oil, it sounds like.
>> Right. I mean, oil is a lot easier to
store and transport.
>> Mhm. And that's what makes this
particularly worrisome because it's hard
to store and transport LNG. And now
you've just taken capacity offline. So
in total, whatever was destroyed in
Qatar, what percentage of the global
supply of LNG is this? So Qatar is the
world's largest producer of LNG. It
supplies about 20% of the world's
liquefied natural gas. It's one of the
biggest exporters.
So what happened at the beginning of the
war, because transit was halted,
basically it suspended its production
cuz it just had no place to put it. The
storage facilities are only so big. So
that's obviously a temporary problem,
but what happened last week was that
because of Iran's attack,
nearly 20%
of Qatar's ability to produce LNG was
destroyed. And that will take several
years to fix, maybe as many as five. And
the reason why we're talking about all
of this is that unlike the Strait of
Hormuz that could theoretically be
opened or closed relatively easily, we
are talking about damage to
infrastructure, oil and gas
infrastructure that is a much
longer-term disturbance into the oil
market and to the global supply, etc.
Exactly. So let's say the war ends
tomorrow. You could open up the Strait
of Hormuz and traffic would start
flowing again. But Qatar is not
immediately going to be able to
repair
and start producing that LNG again. I'm
sure a lot of people have heard of LNG,
but just tell us what is it actually
used for? Basically, it's a source of
energy, right? So you've got oil, you've
got natural gas, you've got coal, you've
got solar power some places, you got
wind power some places, you've got
nuclear power some places, and these are
all energy supplies that countries use
to different degrees.
Okay, so LNG,
a lot of countries switched to it from
coal because coal is really dirty. So
that's one of the reasons, particularly
in Asia, Korea and Japan switched from
using coal to liquefied natural gas.
It's also much cleaner than oil. Mhm.
It's about 30% cleaner than oil. And so
countries were diversifying their energy
supplies cuz you didn't want to put all
your eggs in one basket, right? So you
had oil, you had coal, you had natural
gas. A lot of countries, of course, are
trying now to increase renewables, their
use of solar and wind.
>> But it's safe to say for a lot of
countries, particularly some of these
countries in Asia,
liquefied natural gas is the main source
of energy that people use for their
homes. I wouldn't say it's a main source
of energy, but it's an important source
of energy. So So Japan, for instance,
decreased its dependence on nuclear
power and coal and increased its use of
LNG. So now LNG makes up about 21%
of Japan's total energy supply, but it's
used to generate 30% of its electricity.
So that's huge. You know, how you power
your cell phone, your laptop, your hair
dryer, your oven, your washing machine.
It's how big factories and industry use
to power and run their machines and
such. Korea, LNG makes up about 20% of
its total energy supply and it generates
about 25%
of its electricity. And Korea is an
interesting example because that's a
country that in the last 25 years has
increased its use of LNG by more than
200%.
>> understand why all of this is so
disruptive to some of these countries.
>> Exactly. And on top of that, there's a
lot of other byproducts that are really
important in industrial production. So
one of them is naphtha, which is
probably something you've never heard
of, but it's really important in making
plastics and other gas products. Helium
is really important for making
semiconductors.
And then there's nitrogen-based
fertilizers, which are crucial to the
world's food supply and fertilizer
prices have soared and farmers are
really worried. One, can they even
afford to buy fertilizer? And two, will
it even be available for them to use?
This is what we hear when we hear people
talk about fears about rising food
costs. I feel like fertilizer is the
thing that is cited the most, right now.
>> Exactly. Exactly. So how has the world
felt the impact of this LNG shortage so
far? Like what has that looked like for
some of these countries that you
mentioned or other countries that are so
reliant on this source of energy? So
remember, we're in the middle of an
energy shock. Already we're dealing with
higher prices of oil and that this oil
can't get to where it needs to go. And
so for countries that also use a lot of
LNG, it's like a double whammy because
now prices of that are going up.
And so for poor countries, it's really
hard because they have trouble affording
even [music] the energy supply that's
available. The fallout from the war is
reaching South Asia and millions of
lives, fragile economies particularly
are in trouble, which is why in
Pakistan, skyrocketing fuel prices has
been accompanied with power shortages.
>> [music]
>> We've seen in places like Sri Lanka and
Pakistan, schools are being closed,
government offices are being closed. And
Thailand is ordering government workers
to save energy by suspending overseas
trips and working from home. In
Thailand, they're asking people to take
the stairs instead of elevators. Work
weeks are being shortened to 4 days.
These are countries who are taking
extreme measures because their fear of
the conflict goes on, they're going to
be in a dangerous, dangerous situation.
But rich countries are having an impact
as well. South Korea is imposing a fuel
cap for the first time in 30 years as it
seeks alt- alternative sources of energy
beyond the Strait of Hormuz. In South
Korea, they've started this energy
savings campaign urging people to take
shorter showers, to ride bicycles. The
price of gas in Europe is more than
double the level seen before the
conflict began. And you're seeing
effects in other rich [music] countries,
too, like in Europe, which also uses
LNG, although it's not quite as
dependent as Asia. Prices have gone up a
lot. So, what you've seen in a lot of
countries are leaders [music] talking
about trying to help consumers afford
>> Mhm. heating bills. So, they've cut
taxes on
>> [music]
>> some of their energy.
>> We should remember energy prices in
Europe were already more expensive to
begin with before the war in Ukraine,
and that only made it even more
expensive. So, if people didn't need to
heat particular rooms in their homes or
businesses, they might not. Exactly. So,
I just happened to look at the price
[music] of gas in Britain, for instance.
I live in London, and oh my god, natural
gas prices have increased in Britain by
40%.
>> Wow. Just since the Iran war started.
>> [music]
>> I want to turn to the United States
because the headlines here about how
people are going to be affected are
pretty dire. So, talk to us about how
Americans are feeling these shortages or
might feel these shortages of LNG.
Well, you know, I think it can be
confusing for Americans because we know
that the United States is actually the
biggest producer of oil, and it also
produces a lot of LNG. In fact, Europe
buys a lot of its LNG from the United
States.
>> [music]
>> But what you have to remember is that
the price of energy is set on a global
market.
>> Right. And so, when that's going up,
that's going to affect everything. But
there's something more that I think is
important to remember.
And that is not only the direct effects
of price increases, but there's also
going to be other indirect effects,
knock-on effects down the road that are
very important.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Paddy, you mentioned that there are some
indirect effects of all of this energy
disruption. Tell us what some of those
are. All right, so let me start with
one, which is the idea of safety and
trust.
>> Mhm.
>> [clears throat]
>> So, the increase in the price of energy
and LNG is not just affected by what was
destroyed, that very physical damage.
>> Mhm. But
it's also set a precedent. You know, the
Persian Gulf has been this magnet for
investment, for people to move to. It's
been seen as a really safe place to both
live and work in and invest in. Mhm. And
now there there's a rumbling underneath.
Is it really as safe as we thought? What
you're describing, this instability,
this risk, this lack of safety, all of
this is basically the worst nightmare
for these Gulf states, right? Because
they have been spending years trying to
attract foreign investment. Exactly. And
so, another knock-on effect, remember
we're talking about energy prices
increasing,
>> Mhm. which increases prices of
everything because it's not just the
cost of growing an avocado, it's not
just the cost of producing a pair of
sneakers. You got to transport that,
that's becoming much more expensive.
What does that mean? That means
inflation or the possibility of
inflation, and prices, not just of
energy rising, but prices of everything
across the board rising. And one
response to increasing inflation is that
central banks might be more likely to
raise interest rates.
>> Mhm.
And that causes a whole other set of
economic problems.
>> Right. How much it costs to borrow
money, for example. Exactly. So, let's
talk about AI, right? What does
artificial intelligence have to do with
any of this? So,
>> does it have to do with any of this? So,
think about it. So, number one, what we
know is that data centers, which they're
building, use an enormous amount of
energy. So, now the cost of energy is
going up. But secondly, they also
require huge amounts of loans to build.
They're really expensive.
>> Mhm. Just building these data centers.
Forget about the energy centers.
>> Exactly. And so, if interest rates go
up, that means that the cost of
borrowing money to build them goes up.
And what some Wall Street analysts have
told me is that building these AI data
centers, that's something that's very
sensitive to interest rates increases.
>> Mhm. And at least for Americans,
remember,
AI, these data centers, have been
driving the US economy.
>> Right. They've been propping up the
stock market.
>> propping up the stock market. Exactly.
Are we kind of talking around the R
word, recession? No. And I think it's
important to take a moment and say, you
know, we're talking about the future,
and we are in an incredibly volatile
period. Things are so unpredictable,
and it's really hard to know what's
going to happen next.
>> Mhm. I should also add it's bad for
business because when consumers are
worried about what's happening, they
don't want to spend as much. And
remember, the US economy is really
driven by consumer spending, 70% of it.
Secondly, it also means that businesses
are reluctant to invest because they
don't know what's happening in the
future. So, there's a crisis of
confidence a little bit.
But what I will say is if energy prices
stay high,
if oil, let's say, goes up to $180
a barrel
or higher, then it's going to be very
difficult to avoid a recession. So, I
don't think we're there yet,
but you know, we're in this world of
uncertainty. There's a lot we don't
know. How much longer is this war going
to last? Are there going to be more
attacks on energy infrastructure? What
if there aren't, Paddy? What if the war
literally ends tomorrow? No more strikes
on energy infrastructure. I know you
told us at the top of this conversation
that people are saying, just based on
what's already happened, it will take
months, if not years, to rebuild some of
the facilities. But given all of that,
if there were no more strikes, how long
would it take for things to go back to
normal? Right. Well, you know, I guess
one question is what is normal. But
let's let's talk about
>> pre-Iran
war prices.
>> Right. So, so yesterday the head of the
International Energy Agency said that he
thought it would take at least 6 months,
even if the war were to end tomorrow,
just to get production up to where it
was. Why is that? That's because a lot
of the production stopped when the war
started.
>> Mhm. So, even though the facilities were
intact, they turned it off. And that's
going to keep prices high for a while.
And then there is all these other
uncertainties that are going into energy
prices. And how long is that going to
last? Given all of that, are there other
levers to pull to ease the LNG shortage?
Are there other solves here?
Well, I mean, the US has already
released more supplies from its
petroleum reserves, and the
International Energy Agency has done
that as well to ease supply.
>> Mhm. One other thing that has happened
is that President Trump has lifted the
sanctions on Russia,
which a lot of countries in Europe are
against and is very disturbing,
obviously, to President Zelenskyy and
Ukraine.
>> Because this is, of course, funding
Russia's war effort in Ukraine. Exactly.
So, Russian oil had been selling at a
discounted price, probably about $60 a
barrel before, and now it's about $90 a
barrel. And also, this sounds crazy, but
the US has lifted sanctions on Iran's
exports of oil. Right. This is basically
a multi-billion-dollar war with Iran to
buy oil from Iran. Exactly.
I mean, the one thing, obviously, that
would go a long way in terms of helping
this problem as well as others, is the
development of alternative energy
sources, particularly renewable energy
sources. That's a huge investment up
front,
but actually the cost once you do that
investment of solar and wind is really
much lower. And so, I think that you
will see that. There will be more
development, maybe not in the United
States because it's such a political
issue here, but other places,
development of solar, wind, and I do
think nuclear power. And just to be
clear, what you're saying is that
those renewable sources of energy would
help because it would decrease the
dependence on natural gas, LNG, and oil.
So, anything that you do to increase the
supply of energy is going to help both
in terms of diversification of supply,
as well as bringing down the cost. But
the world is an interconnected place,
Mhm. and it's just going to remain that
way. Right. In other words, you can
diversify your energy supply, you could
try to come up with your own energy
independence strategies, but at the end
of the day, we are living in a global
economy, and that will not insulate you
completely from future
>> Exactly. I mean, look at this is just
like we were talking about the United
States. It's one of the biggest
producers of energy in the world, but
it's still subject to global prices.
>> Right.
Patty Trump had threatened to attack
Iran's energy infrastructure. And so far
he's put a pause on those threats, but
if we did see that, the folks that you
talked to every day, the industry
experts, the analysts, what are they
telling you that they are concerned
about in that scenario? I think one of
the surprises of this war has been how
effective Iran's responses have been. I
mean, it's so much weaker relative to
the United States and Israel, and yet
it's been able to exert enormous
leverage over the global economy.
>> Mhm.
It does speak to the changing nature of
warfare. One guy on a speedboat with a
bomb in the Strait of Hormuz could screw
up all international shipping. Exactly.
I mean, we've just talked about this one
attack that happened last week and how
that could have an impact a few years
down the road.
What happens if there's more damage to
Qatar's gas fields and to other
processing facilities in the region, not
only in Qatar, but in Saudi Arabia and
other places?
So, that's a big worry. And we talked a
lot on the show about how the Iranian
regime, perhaps out of desperation, is
willing to do anything it can to stay in
power. So, it doesn't seem like what
you're talking about is super
far-fetched in terms of escalation.
Right. I mean, there does seem to be a
seeming miscalculation on the part of
the administration.
>> The Trump administration. Yeah, and I
think what's been overlooked in terms of
decision-making is that the people in
control of Iran now see this as an
existential threat.
>> Mhm. And so, it is their survival and
therefore they are willing to do
anything it takes. And I think the other
thing that people didn't really think
about was just how far the ripple
effects could go. I mean, you have three
countries, the US and Israel
at war with Iran and Iran responding.
And meanwhile, you're feeling the
effects halfway around the world.
I mean, [music] every country, every
spot around the globe is feeling the
impact of this.
>> [music]
>> I mean, we're only in the fourth week of
the war and already the head of the
International Energy Agency has called
this the greatest global energy security
threat in history.
I mean, we just don't know exactly how
things are going to play out.
And so, it's [music] a scary time.
Pattie Cohan, thank you so much.
>> [music]
>> Thank you, Rachel.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
>> [music]
>> The Trump administration has sent Iran a
15-point plan for ending the war,
>> [music]
>> reflecting a desire to find an off-ramp
to a conflict that has deeply rattled
the global economy.
President Trump said on Tuesday that
negotiations [music] to end the war had
begun and that the Iranians would like
to quote make a deal.
Iran has maintained [music] publicly
that no negotiations have been underway.
At the same time, [music]
the Pentagon has ordered about 2,000
airborne soldiers to deploy to the
region.
It's unclear where exactly the
paratroopers [music]
would go, but officials said they'd be
within striking distance of Iran.
And a preliminary investigation into the
deadly runway collision at LaGuardia
Airport on Sunday [music]
suggests both technical and staffing
errors were to blame.
The fire truck that collided with an Air
Canada jet [music] didn't have a
transponder, which made it difficult for
the airport's warning systems to track
its location.
And investigators say the [music] two
air controllers on duty had more
responsibilities than they might have
had with more staffing.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Mooj
Saidi, Diana Wynn, and Ricky Niyavetsky.
It was edited by M.J. Davis Lynn,
[music]
Paige Cowett, and Patricia Willis.
Contains music by Marion Lozano and Pat
McCusker. [music]
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily. [music]
I'm Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.